Update 83: Demystifying complex corners: Tari's LMDB Wrapper (#123)
tari-project/tari-dot-com: _updates/2022-07-22-update-83.md

tag: Developer Update
date: 2022-07-22
author: brianp
thumbnail: update-background.jpg
title: "Demystifying complex corners: Tari's LMDB Wrapper"
class: subpage
---

Jumping into a new codebase can be daunting. Everything is new again, something that seems familiar has the sense of
just being a little off. Getting your bearings can take time but you're a great developer and you always make it work.

Today what I want to do is introduce you to a complex area of code within Tari so while you're contributing, if you
come across it you'll have a better idea of what's going on and how to manage it. I'll give you a brief history of what
this code does, and why it works the way it works.

# [Our LMDB Wrapper](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs)

## What is LMDB?

LMDB is a compact, memory-efficient database. All data is exposed via a memory map which allows for blazingly fast
reads.

## What is Tari using LMDB for?

The Tari Base node uses LMDB as a backend store for chain related data. Simply put, we store the
blockchain in it. We were using lmdb in Tari production but we had been using an in-memory database for tests.

> Part of the original design of the `BlockchainBacked` trait and main goal was to abstract away any database specifics so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Part of the original design of the `BlockchainBackend` trait and main goal was to abstract away any database specifics so
```
backed, or back-end?

we could implement common data stores or in-memory data stores without a problem. Go figure modeling
transactions, or read & write locks in memory doesn't always map easily to transactions or locks in other
databases. It required us to make bug fixes twice over and also resulted in the possibility of the tests passing while
the production interface still failed. This resulted in a lot of bugs and time spent managing the in-memory adapters
instead of on the fun problems.
Eventually all of the in-memory data store was also swapped for lmdb but the remnants of the common interface remain.

## How Tari implemented LMDB?

> Well, let's take a few steps back. We have many modules in the Tari repository and code reuse across them is common. I
> mean why wouldn't you when you have the flexibility. As a result we write abstractions to wrap functionality as each of
> the dependent modules may want to use that functionality differently. Let's dive into
> the [chain_storage module](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage). The
> module is designed around managing blockchain state. It is written to allow configuration of the chain state to be
> defined by the needs of the module. You may wish to store the UTXO set in memory, and the kernels backed by LMDB, while
> the merkle trees are stored in flat files for example. To make this work our `chain_storage` module has
> a `BlockchainDatabase` struct.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a few steps back. We have many modules in the Tari repository and code reuse across them is common. I
mean why wouldn't you when you have the flexibility. As a result, we write abstractions to wrap functionality as each of
the dependent modules may want to use that functionality differently. Let's dive into
the [chain_storage module](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage). The
module is designed around managing blockchain state. It is written to allow configuration of the chain state to be
defined by the needs of the module. You may wish to store the UTXO set in memory, and the kernels backed by LMDB, while
the merkle trees are stored in flat files for example. To make this work our `chain_storage` module has
a `BlockchainDatabase` struct.

```

The part we care about most though is `<B>` `where B: BlockchainBackend`.

`BlockchainBackend` is a trait that defines behaviour for database wrappers that store blockchain data. Using the trait
allows us to make some guarantees such as using `Send`, and `Sync` (rusts automatically derived, methodless, marker
traits) to guarantee thread safety, as well as atomic transactions to ensure database integrity.

Here is where LMDB enters the picture again. We've written an `LMDBDatabase` struct which implements
the `BlockchainBackend` trait. This allows us to define a wrapper that promises we meet all the necessities to operate
as a
blockchain backend, and ensures the functionality to host that data in LMDB. You may have already taken a peek
and noticed we have an `lmdb_db` subfolder in our `chain_storage` module folder. Within the subfolder we have two
similarly
named files:

- [base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb.rs)
- [base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs)

> So what gives - what's the separation of concerns here and who's doing what job exactly? Great question I'm glad you
> asked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what gives? What's the separation of concerns here and who's doing what job exactly? Great question! I'm glad you
asked.
```

### Let's start with `lmdb_db.rs`.

This is where our implementation of a `BlockchainBackend` occurs. We've implemented all
the necessary methods here, and it provides the API that is commonly used throughout different Tari clients. But it does
a lot more. lmdb is a key, value store and as such it doesn't represent just a single database, but the possibility of
many databases where each is an independent key, value store. but it is capable of cross database reads
and writes in a single atomic transaction. If you wanted to map the concept to something more
familiar you might think about each database as a table. Back to `lmdb_db.rs`, where
we [define all the different databases](https://github.com/tari-project/tari/blob/90a5ec3/base_layer/core/src/chain_storage/lmdb_db/lmdb_db.rs#L126-L149)

> we want to store into. It'll create the databases if they don't exist and keep a reference to each of them easily
> available. It also attempts to handle some additional transaction locking for us but we'll get into that a little later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we want to store into. It'll create the databases if they don't exist and keep a reference to each, so that they are readily
available. It also attempts to handle some additional transaction locking for us but we'll get into that a little later.
```

### What `lmdb.rs` offers

Consider `lmdb.rs` just a smidge closer to the actual database. Something between our wrapper abstraction, and the lmdb
interface. It's designed to perform very specific tasks on the databases. It provides utility functions used within
the `chain_storage` module. De-duping inserts, counts, gets, sets,

> matching, and filtering results. It's a module of functions we commonly when we're about to finalize a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
matching, and filtering results. It's a module of functions we commonly need when we're about to finalize a transaction.
```
